Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the inotropes.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to the inotropes. Define the terms and classify the drugs.
An inotrope is a drug that alters the force of myocardial contraction;
a positive inotrope increases contractility.
This is distinct from a chronotrope, which alters heart rate; a lusitrope,
which alters relaxation; and a vasopressor,
which raises blood pressure by vasoconstriction — though many agents do several of
these.
The positive inotropes are classified by mechanism into:
the catecholamines and sympathomimetics, such as dobutamine, dopamine, adrenaline,
noradrenaline and isoprenaline, acting through beta-one receptors;
the phosphodiesterase-three inhibitors, such as milrinone and enoximone,
the inodilators; the calcium sensitisers, such as levosimendan;
and the cardiac glycosides, such as digoxin.
So inotropes increase contractility by several distinct mechanisms —
beta-adrenergic, phosphodiesterase inhibition,
calcium sensitisation and sodium-pump inhibition — and understanding these
mechanisms explains their differing haemodynamic and adverse profiles.
Describe the mechanism by which beta-one agonists increase contractility.
Beta-one adrenoceptor stimulation couples through the Gs protein to adenylate
cyclase, raising intracellular cyclic AMP, which activates protein kinase A.
Protein kinase A phosphorylates calcium channels and handling proteins,
increasing the influx of calcium during the action potential and its release from
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, so that more calcium is available to the contractile
apparatus and the force of contraction rises.
The same cyclic-AMP pathway speeds relaxation and increases heart rate and
conduction.
So the final common step is a rise in cyclic AMP leading to increased intracellular
calcium and stronger contraction; the catecholamine inotropes act by stimulating
this pathway at the receptor, and, as we shall see,
the phosphodiesterase inhibitors act by preventing the breakdown of cyclic AMP,
reaching the same end by a different route.
Describe dobutamine.
Dobutamine is a synthetic catecholamine and the prototypical inotrope,
acting predominantly on beta-one receptors to increase contractility and,
to a lesser extent, rate, with some beta-two-mediated vasodilatation that tends to
reduce systemic vascular resistance and afterload.
The net effect is an increase in cardiac output with a fall or little change in
systemic vascular resistance, making it well suited to states of poor contractility
with adequate or high resistance, such as cardiogenic shock and decompensated heart
failure, and low-output states after cardiac surgery.
It is given by titrated infusion. Its adverse effects are tachycardia,
increased myocardial oxygen demand with the risk of ischaemia, arrhythmias,
and hypotension if the patient is hypovolaemic.
So dobutamine is the beta-one inotrope of choice for poor contractility,
raising output while tending to lower afterload,
with tachyarrhythmia and ischaemia as the main risks.
Describe the phosphodiesterase-three inhibitors.
The phosphodiesterase-three inhibitors, milrinone and enoximone,
increase contractility by a non-adrenergic route:
they inhibit the enzyme phosphodiesterase-three,
which normally breaks down cyclic AMP, so cyclic AMP accumulates in the myocardium,
increasing contractility, and in vascular smooth muscle, causing vasodilatation.
They are therefore called inodilators,
increasing cardiac output both by improved contractility and by reducing both
afterload and preload through arterial and venous dilatation,
and they also improve diastolic relaxation.
Because they act beyond the beta receptor,
they remain effective when beta receptors are downregulated or blocked,
as in chronic heart failure or beta-blockade.
Their main adverse effect is hypotension from the vasodilatation,
and they can cause arrhythmias; milrinone is renally cleared,
so it accumulates in renal failure.
So the phosphodiesterase inhibitors are inodilators that raise output and lower
filling and afterload, useful where beta receptors are unresponsive.
Describe levosimendan.
Levosimendan is a calcium sensitiser.
It increases contractility by binding to cardiac troponin C and increasing the
sensitivity of the contractile apparatus to the calcium already present,
enhancing force without increasing intracellular calcium,
which means it improves contraction without the rise in myocardial oxygen demand
and the arrhythmogenicity associated with calcium-loading inotropes.
It also opens ATP-sensitive potassium channels, causing vasodilatation — arterial,
venous and coronary — so it too is an inodilator, reducing afterload and preload.
It has a long-acting active metabolite,
giving a prolonged effect for days after a short infusion.
Its main adverse effect is hypotension from vasodilatation,
and it can cause tachycardia and arrhythmia.
It is used in decompensated heart failure and low-output states.
So levosimendan increases contractility by sensitising the myofilaments to calcium,
with vasodilatation, offering inotropy with less increase in oxygen demand.
Describe digoxin as an inotrope.
Digoxin is a cardiac glycoside with a modest positive inotropic action and
important effects on cardiac conduction.
It inhibits the sodium-potassium ATPase of the myocyte membrane,
raising intracellular sodium, which reduces the activity of the sodium-calcium
exchanger, so that less calcium is extruded and intracellular calcium rises,
increasing contractility.
Separately, it increases vagal tone,
slowing conduction through the atrioventricular node,
which is the basis of its use to control the ventricular rate in atrial
fibrillation. It is used in heart failure with atrial fibrillation and for rate
control.
Its great drawback is a narrow therapeutic index with serious toxicity,
and it is renally excreted with a long half-life.
So digoxin is a weak inotrope whose main clinical value is atrioventricular nodal
slowing for rate control, limited by its narrow therapeutic index.
What are the indications for inotropic support?
Inotropes are used where the primary problem is inadequate myocardial contractility
and cardiac output, after fluid status and rhythm have been optimised.
The main indications are cardiogenic shock,
from myocardial infarction or other causes;
acute decompensation of chronic heart failure with low output and hypoperfusion;
the low-cardiac-output state after cardiac surgery;
septic and other shock complicated by myocardial depression,
where an inotrope is added to a vasopressor;
and bradycardia or low output pending definitive treatment.
They are a temporising support to maintain organ perfusion while the underlying
problem is treated, not a cure. The choice of agent depends on the accompanying
vascular state — an inodilator where resistance is high,
an inopressor where resistance is low.
So inotropes support the failing circulation in defined low-output states,
as a bridge while the cause is addressed.
What are the adverse effects and the concern about mortality?
The adverse effects of the inotropes follow from their mechanism.
The catecholamine and phosphodiesterase inhibitors,
by raising cyclic AMP and intracellular calcium,
increase myocardial oxygen demand and provoke tachycardia and tachyarrhythmias,
with the risk of myocardial ischaemia,
and the inodilators cause hypotension from vasodilatation.
There is also an important outcome concern:
although inotropes improve haemodynamics in the short term,
their use in chronic and acute heart failure has been associated, in trials,
with increased mortality, attributed to arrhythmias and increased oxygen demand.
The implication is that inotropes are used at the lowest effective dose for the
shortest time, for genuine low-output states, as a bridge,
rather than to improve numbers for their own sake.
So they carry arrhythmic and ischaemic risks and an association with increased
mortality, which disciplines their use.
Describe digoxin toxicity and its management.
Digoxin toxicity is important because of the drug's narrow therapeutic index.
It is precipitated by high levels, by renal impairment reducing clearance,
and especially by hypokalaemia, which potentiates the drug,
as well as hypomagnesaemia and hypercalcaemia.
The features are gastrointestinal — nausea, vomiting, anorexia;
visual — disturbances of colour vision, classically a yellow tinge;
and cardiac — a wide range of arrhythmias,
characteristically those combining increased automaticity with atrioventricular
block, such as atrial tachycardia with block, and ventricular arrhythmias.
Management includes stopping the drug,
correcting hypokalaemia and other electrolyte disturbances, treating arrhythmias,
and, in severe toxicity, giving digoxin-specific antibody fragments,
which bind and neutralise the drug.
So digoxin toxicity, potentiated by hypokalaemia and renal impairment,
causes gastrointestinal, visual and arrhythmic features,
treated by correcting electrolytes and, when severe, with antibody fragments.
How would you choose between the inotropes for a given patient?
I would choose by the haemodynamic picture and the vascular state.
For poor contractility with adequate or high systemic vascular resistance —
cardiogenic shock, decompensated heart failure — dobutamine is a good first choice,
raising output while reducing afterload,
or an inodilator such as milrinone or levosimendan,
particularly where the patient is on beta-blockers or has chronic heart failure
with downregulated beta receptors, accepting their tendency to hypotension.
Where contractility is poor and resistance is also low,
as in septic shock with myocardial depression, an inopressor such as adrenaline,
or an inotrope combined with noradrenaline, is used to support both.
Levosimendan suits situations needing a prolonged effect.
For atrial fibrillation with heart failure, digoxin adds rate control.
So the choice balances the need for inotropy against the vascular resistance and
the rhythm, individualised to the patient.
Pull it together: how do you use inotropes rationally?
I would reserve inotropes for genuine low-cardiac-output states,
after optimising preload and rhythm,
recognising that they support the circulation as a bridge while the underlying
cause is treated and that they carry arrhythmic and ischaemic risks and an
association with increased mortality,
so I would use the lowest effective dose for the shortest time.
I would choose the agent by the haemodynamic picture — dobutamine or an inodilator
for poor contractility, an inopressor where resistance is also low,
an inodilator where beta receptors are downregulated or blocked,
levosimendan where a prolonged effect is wanted,
digoxin for rate control in atrial fibrillation — and I would deliver them by
titrated infusion, guided by invasive arterial and cardiac-output monitoring,
against a defined perfusion target.
I would monitor for arrhythmia and ischaemia and, with digoxin,
for toxicity and electrolyte disturbance. So rational use is targeted, monitored,
time-limited and matched to the haemodynamic state.
Place inotropy in the context of the determinants of cardiac output.
Cardiac output is the product of heart rate and stroke volume,
and stroke volume is determined by preload, afterload and contractility.
Inotropes act on contractility, the intrinsic force of contraction independent of
loading, shifting the Frank-Starling relationship so that for a given preload the
heart ejects more.
But contractility is only one lever:
before reaching for an inotrope I would optimise preload by correcting
hypovolaemia, since the Frank-Starling mechanism increases output with filling,
and consider afterload, since reducing a high afterload can improve output in the
failing heart, and correct the rhythm.
An inotrope is indicated when output remains inadequate despite adequate preload
and rhythm, that is, when the problem is genuinely poor contractility.
So inotropy is one of several determinants of output,
and inotropes are used once preload, afterload and rhythm have been addressed,
for a true contractility problem.
Describe the balance of myocardial oxygen supply and demand as it relates to
inotropes.
The myocardium's oxygen demand is determined by heart rate,
contractility and wall tension, while its supply depends on coronary blood flow,
which occurs mainly in diastole, and the oxygen content of the blood.
Inotropes that act by raising intracellular calcium — the catecholamines and
phosphodiesterase inhibitors — increase contractility and often rate,
raising oxygen demand, and if they cause tachycardia they shorten diastole and so
reduce the time for coronary perfusion, which can precipitate myocardial ischaemia,
particularly in the patient with coronary disease.
This supply-demand penalty is the basis of their arrhythmic and ischaemic risk.
Levosimendan, by sensitising the myofilaments to calcium rather than raising it,
increases contractility with less increase in oxygen demand,
a theoretical advantage.
So inotropes that load calcium increase oxygen demand and may impair supply,
which underlies their ischaemic risk and the appeal of calcium sensitisation.
What is the role of glucagon and calcium as inotropic agents?
Both have specific roles.
Calcium, given as calcium chloride or gluconate,
produces a transient increase in contractility and vascular tone and is used to
treat the myocardial depression of hyperkalaemia, hypocalcaemia,
and calcium-channel-blocker toxicity, and after cardiac surgery,
though its routine inotropic use is limited.
Glucagon is notable as the specific treatment for beta-blocker overdose:
it increases myocardial cyclic AMP by a route independent of the beta receptor,
through its own receptor, so it increases heart rate and contractility even when
the beta receptors are blocked, bypassing the blockade.
It is similarly useful in calcium-channel-blocker overdose.
So calcium is a transient inotrope for specific metabolic and toxic states,
and glucagon is the inotrope that bypasses beta-blockade,
making it the antidote for beta-blocker overdose.
Describe how cardiac output is monitored when titrating inotropes.
Titrating inotropes rationally requires measurement of the cardiac output and
related variables, beyond pressure alone.
The methods include the pulmonary artery catheter,
which measures cardiac output by thermodilution and gives filling pressures and
mixed venous oxygen saturation, historically the reference but now less used;
the oesophageal Doppler, which estimates output from aortic blood flow velocity;
arterial pulse-contour analysis, which derives output from the arterial waveform,
sometimes calibrated by thermodilution; and echocardiography,
which assesses filling, contractility and output and identifies the cause of shock.
These allow the inotrope to be titrated to a measured output or to surrogates such
as the mixed venous saturation and lactate clearance,
and the response assessed objectively.
So cardiac-output monitoring — by thermodilution, Doppler,
pulse-contour analysis or echocardiography — guides the titration of inotropes to a
measured haemodynamic target rather than to pressure alone.
How are inotropes used in right ventricular failure and pulmonary hypertension?
Right ventricular failure, as in pulmonary hypertension or after cardiac surgery,
poses a particular problem because the failing right ventricle is sensitive to its
afterload, the pulmonary vascular resistance.
The aims are to support right ventricular contractility while reducing pulmonary
vascular resistance and maintaining systemic pressure to preserve right coronary
perfusion.
Inotropes such as dobutamine or milrinone support contractility,
and the inodilators have the advantage of reducing pulmonary vascular resistance,
though their systemic vasodilatation may need a vasopressor such as noradrenaline
to maintain coronary perfusion of the right ventricle.
Selective pulmonary vasodilators — inhaled nitric oxide or prostacyclin — reduce
the right ventricular afterload without systemic hypotension.
So in right ventricular failure, inodilators support contractility and lower
pulmonary resistance, combined with a vasopressor to maintain systemic and coronary
pressure and with selective pulmonary vasodilators.
Give the pharmacokinetic and dosing detail of milrinone and levosimendan.
Milrinone is given as an intravenous loading dose followed by an infusion;
it is eliminated by the kidney, so it accumulates in renal impairment,
where the dose must be reduced, and its half-life is a few hours,
longer than the catecholamines, so its effect persists after stopping.
Levosimendan is given as an infusion, often with or without a loading dose,
over about twenty-four hours; its distinctive feature is a long-acting active
metabolite that prolongs its haemodynamic effect for up to a week or more after the
infusion ends, which can be an advantage for sustained support but means
hypotension may persist.
Both are inodilators causing hypotension, often requiring a vasopressor.
So milrinone is renally cleared with a half-life of hours,
and levosimendan has a long-acting metabolite giving days of effect,
which shape their dosing and their prolonged hypotensive potential.
What is dobutamine stress echocardiography?
Dobutamine stress echocardiography is a diagnostic use of an inotrope rather than a
therapeutic one. Dobutamine is infused in increasing doses to increase myocardial
work and oxygen demand, mimicking the effect of exercise,
while the heart is imaged by echocardiography.
In a region supplied by a significant coronary stenosis,
the increased demand provokes ischaemia,
seen as a new or worsening wall-motion abnormality,
identifying inducible ischaemia and the territory involved.
It is used to assess for coronary disease and myocardial viability in patients
unable to exercise, including in the preoperative assessment of cardiac risk before
major surgery.
So dobutamine stress echocardiography exploits the inotrope's increase in oxygen
demand to unmask inducible ischaemia,
a diagnostic application relevant to perioperative cardiac risk assessment.
Detail the pharmacokinetics of digoxin and the influences on its level.
Digoxin is incompletely absorbed orally, with a large volume of distribution,
and is eliminated predominantly unchanged by the kidney,
so its clearance falls and its level rises in renal impairment,
requiring dose reduction; it has a long half-life of around a day and a half,
so steady state is reached slowly and a loading dose is used when a rapid effect is
needed.
Its narrow therapeutic index means the plasma level must be interpreted alongside
the clinical picture and electrolytes. Many factors alter its level or effect:
renal function, body mass, and interacting drugs such as amiodarone,
verapamil and quinidine, which raise the level.
Hypokalaemia potentiates its toxicity at any given level.
So digoxin is renally cleared with a long half-life,
its level raised by renal impairment and by interacting drugs,
and its toxicity potentiated by hypokalaemia,
all of which demand careful dosing and monitoring.
How are inotropes weaned, and why can this be difficult?
Inotropes are weaned gradually as the underlying problem resolves and the
circulation recovers, reducing the dose stepwise while monitoring the cardiac
output, pressure and perfusion to ensure the heart can sustain an adequate output
at the lower dose.
Weaning can be difficult for several reasons:
the myocardium may have become dependent,
with downregulated receptors after prolonged catecholamine exposure;
there may be a rebound fall in output;
and the inodilators with long-acting metabolites, such as levosimendan,
have effects that persist regardless.
A failure to wean indicates inadequate myocardial recovery and may prompt
consideration of mechanical support. The process is guided by haemodynamic
monitoring and by addressing the underlying cause.
So inotropes are weaned gradually under haemodynamic monitoring,
with difficulty arising from receptor downregulation,
dependence and the persistence of long-acting agents,
and failure to wean signalling inadequate recovery.
What is the place of mechanical circulatory support relative to inotropes?
When inotropic and vasopressor support is insufficient to maintain adequate
perfusion in cardiogenic shock or severe heart failure,
mechanical circulatory support may be considered,
which unloads or replaces the work of the failing heart rather than driving it
harder and so avoids the increased oxygen demand of inotropes.
The options include the intra-aortic balloon pump,
which augments coronary perfusion and reduces afterload;
ventricular assist devices; and veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation,
which provides full cardiorespiratory support.
These are used as a bridge to recovery, to decision,
or to transplantation or a durable device.
The relevance to inotropes is that escalating inotrope doses with worsening
perfusion should prompt timely consideration of mechanical support rather than
ever-higher pharmacological stimulation of a failing heart.
So mechanical support is the next step when inotropes fail,
unloading the heart instead of driving it.
Compare the inotropes by their effect on heart rate, afterload and oxygen demand.
Considering the key variables: dobutamine increases contractility and rate,
with beta-two-mediated vasodilatation lowering afterload,
and increases oxygen demand.
Adrenaline increases contractility and rate strongly with dose-dependent
vasoconstriction, and markedly increases oxygen demand.
The phosphodiesterase inhibitors, milrinone and enoximone,
increase contractility with vasodilatation lowering both preload and afterload,
a variable effect on rate, and increase oxygen demand somewhat.
Levosimendan increases contractility with vasodilatation and relatively little
increase in oxygen demand, an advantage. Digoxin increases contractility modestly
and slows the rate.
So if I want inotropy with afterload reduction I would consider dobutamine or an
inodilator; if I need pressure as well, adrenaline;
if I want to minimise the oxygen-demand penalty, levosimendan;
and digoxin where rate control accompanies the need for modest inotropy.
The comparison guides the choice by the desired haemodynamic profile.
Give a final integrated account of the rational use of inotropes.
I would reserve inotropes for genuine low-output states due to poor contractility,
after optimising preload, afterload and rhythm,
recognising them as a bridge while the cause is treated and that they carry
arrhythmic and ischaemic risks and an association with increased mortality.
I would choose by the haemodynamic profile measured with cardiac-output monitoring:
dobutamine or an inodilator for poor contractility with adequate resistance,
an inodilator where beta receptors are downregulated or blocked or where afterload
reduction is wanted, an inopressor such as adrenaline where resistance is also low,
levosimendan where minimising oxygen demand or a prolonged effect is valuable,
glucagon for beta-blocker overdose,
and digoxin for rate control in atrial fibrillation.
I would titrate to a measured target at the lowest effective dose,
wean as recovery allows, and consider mechanical support when escalating doses
fail. So rational use is targeted, monitored, mechanism-matched,
time-limited and integrated with the treatment of the cause.
Describe adrenaline and noradrenaline used specifically as inotropes.
Although usually thought of as a vasopressor,
noradrenaline has beta-one activity and so a degree of inotropic action,
and it is used in septic shock both to restore vascular tone and to support the
depressed myocardium; where more inotropy is needed an additional agent is added.
Adrenaline is a powerful inopressor,
increasing contractility and rate through beta-one and raising resistance through
alpha-one at higher doses, used in cardiogenic and septic shock with myocardial
depression and after cardiac surgery,
and it is the inotrope of choice in anaphylaxis and arrest.
Its drawbacks as an inotrope are marked tachycardia,
a rise in lactate and myocardial oxygen demand, and arrhythmia.
So adrenaline is a potent inopressor for combined poor contractility and low
resistance, and noradrenaline provides some inotropy alongside its vasopressor
action, both used where vasoconstriction is also required.
Describe isoprenaline as an inotrope and chronotrope.
Isoprenaline is a pure beta agonist,
stimulating beta-one and beta-two receptors with no alpha action,
so it increases heart rate, contractility and conduction strongly and causes
vasodilatation, lowering systemic vascular resistance.
Its principal use is to increase the heart rate in severe bradycardia and
high-grade atrioventricular block, as a temporising measure pending pacing,
and it has been used to maintain the rate in the denervated transplanted heart,
which lacks vagal tone and does not respond to atropine.
Its drawbacks are marked tachycardia,
a substantial increase in myocardial oxygen demand with the risk of ischaemia and
arrhythmia, and hypotension from the beta-two vasodilatation.
So isoprenaline is the pure beta agent used chiefly as a chronotrope for
bradycardia and heart block, with its tachycardia,
oxygen-demand penalty and vasodilatation limiting its wider use.
How are inotropes used in the low-cardiac-output state after cardiac surgery?
After cardiac surgery a low-cardiac-output state may follow,
from myocardial stunning, the effects of cardiopulmonary bypass,
ischaemia or an inadequate repair, and inotropic support is commonly needed to
maintain output while the myocardium recovers.
After optimising preload, rhythm — often with pacing — and afterload,
an inotrope such as adrenaline, dobutamine or milrinone is used,
the inodilators being useful where afterload reduction is wanted,
with a vasopressor added to maintain pressure.
The choice and combination are guided by cardiac-output monitoring and
echocardiography, and the support is weaned as the heart recovers.
Failure to wean, or escalating requirements,
prompts consideration of mechanical support such as an intra-aortic balloon pump.
So inotropes support the post-cardiac-surgery low-output state as a bridge to
myocardial recovery, guided by monitoring, with mechanical support held in reserve.
What does the evidence show about digoxin in heart failure?
Digoxin's role in heart failure has been clarified by trial evidence.
In patients with heart failure in sinus rhythm,
the large digoxin trial showed that digoxin reduced hospitalisation for heart
failure and improved symptoms but did not improve survival,
with a suggestion of harm at higher levels.
Consequently, in heart failure with reduced ejection fraction,
digoxin is now a later-line agent for symptom and hospitalisation control in
patients who remain symptomatic despite the prognostically beneficial therapies,
rather than a first-line or survival-improving drug.
Its clearer indication remains rate control in atrial fibrillation,
often combined with heart failure.
So digoxin improves symptoms and reduces hospitalisation but not mortality in heart
failure, making it an adjunctive symptomatic agent,
while its firm role is rate control in atrial fibrillation.
Describe digoxin-specific antibody fragments and their use.
Digoxin-specific antibody fragments are the specific antidote for life-threatening
digoxin toxicity.
They are fragments of antibodies raised against digoxin that bind the free drug
with high affinity, forming an inactive complex that is excreted by the kidney,
rapidly lowering the free digoxin concentration and reversing its cardiac and other
effects.
They are indicated in severe toxicity — life-threatening arrhythmias,
significant hyperkalaemia from digoxin,
and large overdoses — with the dose calculated from the amount ingested or the
plasma level.
After their use, measured total digoxin levels become unreliable because they
include bound drug.
So digoxin-specific antibody fragments bind and neutralise digoxin,
providing rapid reversal of severe toxicity,
the dose being guided by the ingested amount or level,
and they are a key part of managing serious digoxin poisoning alongside correcting
electrolytes and treating arrhythmias.
When should inotropes be avoided or used with particular caution?
Inotropes should be avoided or used with great caution where their increase in
myocardial oxygen demand and arrhythmogenicity would do harm,
and where the problem is not truly one of contractility.
They are inappropriate, and dangerous, in hypovolaemia, where the answer is fluid,
not inotropy, and in dynamic left ventricular outflow obstruction such as
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy,
where increasing contractility worsens the obstruction.
In ischaemic states they may precipitate or extend infarction.
In chronic heart failure, long-term inotrope use increases mortality.
They should not be used merely to improve a number without a haemodynamic rationale.
So inotropes are avoided in hypovolaemia, in dynamic outflow obstruction,
and for cosmetic correction of numbers,
and used cautiously in ischaemia and chronic heart failure,
reflecting the principle that they are for genuine low-output states from poor
contractility, after other causes are addressed.
Explain tolerance and receptor downregulation with prolonged inotrope use.
Prolonged stimulation of the beta receptors by catecholamine inotropes leads to
their downregulation and desensitisation,
so that the inotropic response diminishes over time — a tolerance — requiring
escalating doses for the same effect,
which is undesirable given the dose-related risks.
This is part of why chronic catecholamine support is problematic and why agents
acting beyond the receptor are valuable:
the phosphodiesterase inhibitors raise cyclic AMP without needing the receptor,
and so remain effective despite downregulation or beta-blockade,
as does levosimendan through calcium sensitisation.
The same downregulation underlies the diminished response of the chronically
failing, sympathetically driven heart to beta agonists.
So tolerance from beta-receptor downregulation limits prolonged catecholamine
inotropy and favours the receptor-independent agents in chronic heart failure and
beta-blockade, a key practical and conceptual point.
How do you choose an inotrope in septic shock with myocardial depression?
In septic shock the primary disturbance is vasodilatation,
treated with noradrenaline, but a proportion of patients develop septic
cardiomyopathy with myocardial depression and a low cardiac output despite restored
vascular tone, where an inotrope is added.
The usual choice is to add adrenaline,
which provides inotropy and supports pressure,
or dobutamine alongside the noradrenaline,
guided by cardiac-output monitoring or echocardiography demonstrating the depressed
contractility.
The aim is to restore an adequate output and perfusion,
judged by lactate clearance and mixed venous saturation,
at the lowest effective dose, while continuing source control and the wider
management. Levosimendan has been studied in septic cardiomyopathy without clear
benefit.
So in septic shock with myocardial depression I would add an inotrope — adrenaline
or dobutamine — to noradrenaline, guided by demonstrated low output,
targeting perfusion rather than numbers.
What monitoring targets guide inotrope titration?
Inotropes are titrated not to a fixed dose but to targets reflecting adequate
perfusion. The blood pressure, ideally measured invasively,
gives perfusion pressure but not flow.
The cardiac output or index, measured by thermodilution,
Doppler or pulse-contour analysis, gives the flow being generated.
Surrogates of the adequacy of global perfusion include the mixed or central venous
oxygen saturation, which falls when oxygen delivery is inadequate,
and the blood lactate and its clearance,
a rising or persistent lactate indicating inadequate perfusion.
Urine output and the clinical signs of perfusion supplement these.
The inotrope is titrated to restore these towards normal at the lowest effective
dose.
So titration targets the cardiac output and the markers of perfusion adequacy —
venous saturation, lactate clearance, urine output — rather than pressure alone,
which is the rational basis for using just enough inotrope and no more.
Summarise how the mechanism of each inotrope class predicts its clinical profile.
Each class's mechanism predicts its profile.
The beta-one agonists raise cyclic AMP and intracellular calcium,
giving inotropy and chronotropy with increased oxygen demand and arrhythmia,
dobutamine adding beta-two vasodilatation.
The phosphodiesterase-three inhibitors raise cyclic AMP by blocking its breakdown,
giving inotropy plus vasodilatation — inodilators — effective despite beta-blockade
and downregulation, but causing hypotension.
The calcium sensitiser levosimendan increases the sensitivity of troponin to
calcium, giving inotropy with less oxygen-demand penalty,
plus vasodilatation and a long-acting metabolite.
The cardiac glycoside digoxin inhibits the sodium pump to raise calcium modestly
and increases vagal tone, giving weak inotropy with atrioventricular nodal slowing.
So from the mechanism one can predict the haemodynamic effect,
the oxygen-demand and arrhythmic risk, the effect on afterload,
and the behaviour under beta-blockade — which is the rational basis for choosing
between them.
Give a concise final summary of inotrope selection by clinical scenario.
By scenario: in cardiogenic shock with high resistance,
dobutamine or an inodilator to raise output and lower afterload,
adding a vasopressor if pressure falls; in decompensated chronic heart failure,
especially on beta-blockers, an inodilator such as milrinone or levosimendan that
works despite beta-blockade; in septic shock with myocardial depression,
adrenaline or dobutamine added to noradrenaline; after cardiac surgery, adrenaline,
dobutamine or milrinone guided by monitoring; in right ventricular failure,
an inodilator with a vasopressor and selective pulmonary vasodilators;
in bradycardia or heart block, isoprenaline pending pacing;
in beta-blocker overdose, glucagon; and in atrial fibrillation with heart failure,
digoxin for rate control.
Throughout, titrate to perfusion targets at the lowest effective dose,
wean as recovery allows, and escalate to mechanical support rather than ever-higher
doses when the heart cannot recover. So selection follows the haemodynamic scenario
and the vascular state.
Finally, how does the choice of inotrope interact with the patient's existing
heart-failure therapy?
The patient's chronic therapy strongly influences inotrope choice,
and the commonest example is beta-blockade.
A patient with chronic heart failure is likely to be on a beta-blocker,
which blunts the response to the beta-agonist inotropes such as dobutamine,
so larger doses may be needed or, more rationally,
an agent acting beyond the beta receptor is chosen — a phosphodiesterase-three
inhibitor such as milrinone, or the calcium sensitiser levosimendan — which retain
their effect despite beta-blockade and additionally reduce afterload.
The patient may also be on a renin-angiotensin blocker and a diuretic,
affecting volume and electrolytes, and digoxin,
with its toxicity potentiated by the hypokalaemia that diuretics cause.
So I would account for chronic beta-blockade by favouring the receptor-independent
inodilators, and for the diuretic-induced electrolyte disturbances when using
digoxin, fitting the acute inotrope to the chronic therapy.
So existing heart-failure treatment, especially beta-blockade,
steers the choice towards milrinone or levosimendan.
Finally, what are the inotrope and vasopressor priorities in cardiac arrest and the
immediate post-arrest period?
In cardiac arrest the key drug is adrenaline,
one milligram intravenously every three to five minutes,
for its alpha-mediated rise in coronary and cerebral perfusion during compressions,
with amiodarone after the third shock in shockable rhythms.
In the immediate post-arrest period,
the return of spontaneous circulation is often followed by myocardial dysfunction —
post-arrest myocardial stunning — and vasodilatation,
causing haemodynamic instability that frequently requires support.
I would treat this with fluids and titrated infusions guided by monitoring and
echocardiography: noradrenaline for the vasodilatation and to maintain a
perfusion-pressure target, and an inotrope such as adrenaline or dobutamine for the
myocardial dysfunction, while treating the cause of the arrest,
optimising oxygenation and avoiding both hypotension and excessive demand.
So in arrest adrenaline is central,
and the post-arrest period typically needs noradrenaline and an inotrope for the
stunning and vasodilatation, titrated to perfusion within the wider
post-resuscitation care.
How do you integrate inotrope choice with the type of shock at the bedside?
At the bedside I would first define the type of shock,
because it dictates whether an inotrope, a vasopressor, or both are needed,
often using echocardiography and cardiac-output monitoring.
In hypovolaemic and haemorrhagic shock the answer is volume, not inotropes.
In cardiogenic shock, where contractility is poor and resistance high,
I would use an inotrope such as dobutamine or an inodilator,
adding a vasopressor if pressure falls, and consider mechanical support early.
In distributive shock such as septic or anaphylactic shock,
where resistance is low, the priority is a vasopressor — noradrenaline,
or adrenaline in anaphylaxis — adding an inotrope if there is myocardial depression.
In obstructive shock, such as tamponade or massive pulmonary embolism,
the answer is to relieve the obstruction, with temporary support meanwhile.
So I would match the drug to the shock type — fluid for hypovolaemia,
inotrope for cardiogenic, vasopressor for distributive,
relief of obstruction for obstructive — which prevents the common error of treating
the wrong problem.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, A positive inotrope increases contractility (distinct from chronotrope,
lusitrope, vasopressor); classes are catecholamines/beta-1 agonists,
phosphodiesterase-3 inhibitors (inodilators), calcium sensitisers,
and cardiac glycosides.
Second, Beta-1 agonists and PDE-3 inhibitors both raise cyclic AMP and
intracellular calcium (the PDE inhibitors by blocking cAMP breakdown,
so they work despite beta-blockade);
levosimendan sensitises troponin C to calcium without raising oxygen demand;
digoxin inhibits Na/K-ATPase.
Third, Dobutamine (beta-1, with beta-2 vasodilation) raises output and lowers
afterload for cardiogenic shock/heart failure;
milrinone and levosimendan are inodilators causing hypotension;
choose by the vascular state — inodilator if resistance is high, inopressor if low.
Fourth, Inotropes improve short-term haemodynamics but increase myocardial oxygen
demand and arrhythmias and are associated with increased mortality — use the lowest
effective dose for the shortest time as a bridge while treating the cause.
Fifth, Digoxin's value is AV-nodal slowing for rate control in atrial fibrillation;
it has a narrow therapeutic index, with toxicity potentiated by hypokalaemia and
renal impairment (GI, visual and arrhythmic features),
treated by correcting electrolytes and, if severe,
digoxin-specific antibody fragments.
Thank you. That concludes the station.